Editor's comments

Could I also ask you to add a statement in the paper confirming that ethical permission was in place for the acquisition of the human data. Also, with regard to your willingness to provide code, MRM now offers the option of including a Data Availability Statement in its papers (see updated Author Guidelines). This involves a short statement at the end of the paper (before the References) that indicates where code (and data) underlying the publication may be found. Example statements would be "Data Availability Statement: The code that supports the findings of this study is openly available in [repository name] at http://doi.org/[doi], reference number [reference number]." or "Data Availability Statement: The code and data that support the findings of this study are openly available in [repository name] at [URL], reference number [reference number]." I therefore suggest you use this form of wording in your revision (moving it from its current position), in which case you will become one of the first papers to have such a statement in our journal.

Response : TODO

Referee: 1

R1.1 It was not clear early in the paper if the basis set for simulated MMol was a single function (with all peaks included) or a set of individual functions at typical locations.  This may be in the Supplemental data, but should be clarified in the paper.  One more sentence should do. This was further complicated by your description of Figure 7 data when you say that '... a set of independent ... mmol signals in the basis were used to model the ... mmol profile." Section 3.2 says it a bit more clearly, but, please just clarify if the set of lines were used to create and fit the MMol in the data, or just to fit the (previously created) MMol in the data.

Response : TODO

R1.2 It does not seem that you show the actual simulated data in any of your figures. You show the summed/simulated spectra with metab + mmol + baseline + noise, but never the actual noiseless functions for the metab, mmol and baseline signals. I'd like to see some of these at least once for Figure 4 and maybe Figure 7 and 8 if they differ from 4? And you never seem to compare the resultant fitted baseline to the actual baseline signal.  Which is easy to do since you have simulated all this.  I know that at the end of the day, you want to fit the metabolites, but when introducing a new fitting method, discerning readers want to know if/how the baseline interacts with the other parts of the model. This might most easily be added to each figure by doing a separate 'residual' plot for each noiseless metab, noiseless mmol, noiseless baseline as well as the noisy standard residual you now show? And then you should add a bit more discussion about where any variance seemed to occur in your example fitted data as you have more/less baseline signal, or more/less signal fitted to mmol or metabs.

Response : Combining the suggested additional information with the current plots (Figs 4-9) compromised their primary purpose - evaluating the automated baseline flexibility parameter (ED per ppm) across a range of typical data confounds. The suggested plots have instead been provided as supporting information Figures S1-S6 for each of the simulation runs. Comments have been added in the results section on the observed interaction between the metabolite, baseline and mmol signal components.

R1.3 I liked your basic progression of examples, but there's one you did not provide that I'm quite interested in. Your fourth simulation used a single experimental mmol signal (all mmol peaks in one FID?) in the data fitted by a group of individual lipid and mmol peaks in the basis, but there is no baseline in that data.  I'd like to see one more example just like this which also has some baseline signal added in.  I'd like to know if the mmol basis group tries to fit the baseline signal, vs the penalized splines fitting it.  Ideally, you would also show what happens when a simulated dataset that has an experimental mmol signal included, is attempted to be fitted with a mmol basis function (one FID for all mmol peaks) that is not quite exactly accurate for the mmol in the data. This is what can happen when we try to fit a cohort of data with a 'group mean' mmol basis function.  Some of the mmol mismatch then has to be taken up by either the metabolites OR the baseline models.  And that's really an important factor in considering how well an adaptive baseline algorithm works.

Response : Figures 8 and S5 now show how a set of independent MM peaks fitted to an experimentally derived "fixed" baseline interacts with a broad baseline signal at 1.3 PPM.

A simulation has also been performed to test the method against a mismatch between a single "fixed" MM model in the data and "fixed" MM basis component where the amplitude of the two resonances around 1.3 PPM differ by a factor of 2. The ABfit baseline accommodates some of this discrepancy - but not all. The impact of inaccuracies in 'group mean' MM profiles on metabolite estimates is an interesting question, however estimates of the level of variance in MM profiles for healthy or diseased brain are currently contested. For this reason (in addition to constraints on the maximum number of allowable figures), these results are not included in the main paper - but supplied only for review purposes (rev1_3_fig2.pdf and rev1_3_fig1.pdf). Note that the more common method for dealing with variations in MM profiles is to allow independent amplitudes for individual broad components in the basis, and this case is investigated in Figures 7 and 8.

R1.4 I'm not sure if your examples of SI data add enough to this paper to warrant their inclusion. Yes, you show that this method can fit SI data. But, again you are not showing much detail of what variety of data quality, linewidths, spurious baseline signals, etc. are being accommodated by the ABFit method versus any other method. You're just saying that there are reasonable and typical trends in GM/WM metabolite ratios and that maybe an asymmetric lineshape gives a numerical improvement in the fit. Honestly, I can not visualize a significant difference between Fig 10 a/b.  As such, the SI material might better be presented at more length in a separate paper.  However, if you choose to leave it in, I have some comments on what I'd like to see shown and discussed below.

Response : TODO

R1.5 page 3 line 25. 'must to be accurately' awkward

Response : removed the word "to".

R1.6 page 4 line 16. Give just a bit more detail why you use the second order derivative to penalize here please.

Response : wording has been adjusted and a further justification given in the following paragraph.

R1.7 page 4 line 32. What do you mean by 'augmenting' here?  Please clarify.

Response : the row-wise concatenation has been make explicit.

R1.8 page 5 line 12. Why does ED approach 2 with 2nd order derivative?  Would it approach 1 if using 1st derivative? Just for clarity please.

Response : text added for clarity.

R1.9 page 5 line 44. "The AIC is typically used to compare models ..." is a bit too brief. This is a key point of your new method, please expand on how you came to want to use it and why its a good thing.

Response : The text has been adjusted to express a preference for the AIC due to its simpler form which is more intuitively modified. This gives the user freedom to adjust the baseline flexibility "to-taste" - depending on if they would prefer to minimize bias or variance in the metabolite levels.

R1.10 page 6 line 30. When you say the 'compound NAA' did you mean the nominal NAA singlet peak?  It's likely a more accurate description of that peak, but it does engenders some confusion on reading it that way.

Response : changed as suggested.

R1.11 page 6 line 31. Can you please clarify just how you get ED/ppm please?  Did not see that in any of the equations.

Response : an example has been added in the following sentence.

R1.12 page 6 line 38. Clarify if the metab estimation error was calculated from the noiseless simulated metab signal minus the fitted metab model signal, or something else.

Response : The estimation error has been explicitly stated as the sum of squared differences between the true and estimated metabolite amplitudes.

R1.13 page 6 line 41.  Please specify where the metabolite estimate errors come from, and what their units are (% or absolute)?

Response : Clarification has been added.

R1.14 page 7 line 6. Setting m to 5 seems empirical for this data set. Please describe if this was how it was set, and whether this would have to be re-determined for other types of data.  Was it 5 for the SI data?

Response : 5 was chosen empirically and kept constant for all analyses presented. A comment has been added to the discussion on when this may need to be adjusted. 

R1.15 page 7 line 48. Ref for the correlation B0 correction method, please.  MRM 40, p. 822 (1996) unless you have anything earlier?

Response : the earliest reference I could find was in the appendix of the 1996 LCModel paper.

R1.16 page 8 line 14. What is d sub g?  Is this a typo?

Response : yes, should be g sub d.

R1.17 page 8 line 14. Can you give a bit more info *here* on why you chose to only have a Gaussian lineshape function.  If it's due to the asymmetry you add later, that's fine, but mention why it's Gaussian here. Also, was line broadening added to the Mmol basis function during optimization?

Response : Gaussian broadening was chosen due to it being a single parameter and therefore more robust compared to complex models with additional parameters. Marshall (MRM 1997 37 651) showed you can get pretty good results by assuming an overall Gaussian lineshape, and that has been my experience also.

R1.18 page 8 line 21. Eqn 13, in the M prime super TD term, the prime is really hard to see making the first glance at the Eqn sort of a stumble. Maybe change to bar or hat?

Response : Agreed, underline was found to be the clearest option.

R1.19 page 8 line 44. Was an ED of 1 chosen empirically?  Is it only applicable to this type of data?  Please clarify what you mean by 15 P-spline components per ppm.  Is this 15 of the peaks shown in Fig 1 or something else?

Response : Yes empirically. Text has been added to clarify the number of components and conditions where the ED is expected to need adjustment.

R1.20 page 8 line 47. Change specified to constrained, if this is accomplished via constraints in the simplex algorithm for consistency.

Response : changed as suggested.

R1.21 page 9 line 31. 'eliminated that when the' awkward, please clarify.

Response : removed "that".

R1.22 page 10 line 10. Please indicate what figure shows the simulated data mentioned here 'first (Figure x)'  'second (Figure x)'

Response : changed as suggested.

R1.23 page 10 line 33. What was total acquisition time for SI data set?

Response : TODO

R1.24 page 10 line 35. Why were the corners removed?

Response : these voxels were close to the diagonal saturation regions - resulting in reduced SNR and complicating the partial volume calculation.

R1.25 page 10 line 45. Recommend re-licensure under BSD license.  It's more permissive for others to re-use in an open source community.

Response : There are a number of pros and cons between using the BSD and GPL licenses. I try and take a pragmatic view that the GPL licensed Linux kernel and FFTW library have both been enormously successful in both the open source and commercial environments and therefore represents a very reasonable choice.

R1.26 page 12 line 9. Add value of 0.032 ppm in Hz please.

Response : changed as suggested.

R1.27 page 12 line 11. A general comment on SI results, if they stay in the paper. I'd like to see what sort of range of spurious baseline signals were found in the slice and what ABFit did to fit them. Maybe from just one typical row or column. Also, it would be interesting to see a parametric map of ED for the slice. Assuming that ED was allowed to vary? Also please discuss any variations to the settings you made for SI vs simulated SVS data.

Response : TODO

R1.28 page 12 line 41. I find this sentence to be unclear. Did you mean a rigid baseline versus an overly flexible Mmol model?  If not, please clarify.  And expand on how these interact beyond the description of the metab estimation error. Does the signal get fitted incorrectly or not at all?

Response : TODO

R1.29 Figures 3-8. The y-axis for metabolite estimation error all seem to be different. Please note if scale is linear or log just for clarity in the caption. Also, are the error bars in all figures x5 for clarity, or just for Fig 3.

Response : y-axis scale is now mentioned in the caption when log. Error bars are only x5 for Fig 3.

R1.30 Figures 4-8. Please mention in caption what value the dotted line represents for clarity.

Response : Changed as suggested.

Referee: 2

R2.1 it is not very clear what is meant by baseline, as such in the introduction the reader can easily get confused and consider that baseline =MM. Maybe this is because on page 2 lines 18-19 the author mentions only the presence of metabolite signals in the basis set and then in the next sentence baseline is defined as broad signals not present in the basis set.
Please define at the beginning of the introduction what baseline means (e.g. page 2, line 22). Most important that it does not contain MM but mainly “artifacts” present in the spectra

Response : A sentence has been added to improve the distinction between the true and modeled baseline. Macromolecular signals are now mentioned alongside metabolites in the previous sentence to improve the distinction between MM and baseline.

R2.2 page 2 lines 18-16 – the basis set can contain simulated or in vitro acquired metabolite signals. Can you please correct this point?

Response : added the phrase "or experimentally measured".

R2.3 page 2 – QUEST – this fitting algorithm does not contain a specific estimation of the baseline, as far as I know. For QUEST the background is equal with the MM+baseline. Please in the introduction make a clear distinction between fitting algorithms which do a separate baseline estimation and which do not

Response : Whilst the jMRUI implementation of QUEST does not include MM signals by default, I don't see why they couldn't be added to the basis. It's possible this could invalidate some of the assumptions used to separate the baseline from metabolites, but I wouldn't like to speculate on this point. Instead, I have mentioned which methods include these signals by default (LCModel and TARQUIN), informed by the work of Seeger et al MRM 2003.

R2.4 page 2, lines 35-36 – for LCModel the definition provided refers to the dkntmn parameter?

Response : unfortunately this is difficult for me to say for sure - so I'd prefer not to speculate. The dkntmn parameter is not defined in the original LCModel paper or the most recent version of the manual, and my previous correspondence with the author of LCModel regarding technical details has not been enlightening.

R2.5 the information on B0 is missing in the abstract and in the title – can you please add it?

Response : B0 has been added to the abstract, but I would prefer to keep the title B0 independent as the method and theory is applicable to any field strength.

R2.6 page 6 – some questions: why so high SNR? Is this relevant for in vivo data, I think that yes for human data, so please add this information? Why only one resonance at 1.3ppm  for baseline distortions? Usually if the shim in not perfect the WS will neither be and thus a broad baseline signal will appear between 4.7-3.5ppm aprox.

Response : the SNR level was chosen to by typical for human brain MRS at 3 T. Baseline distortions at 1.3 PPM were chosen because they are generally a bigger problem than baseline from residual water - which are more easily suppressed with HSVD or similar.

R2.7 page 7 – ED definition – please mention that a low value = non-flexible baseline, while a high value= flexible baseline. This is “contrary” to LCModel for instance, where a high value for dkntmn = non-flexible baseline (of course the definition of each parameter is different, but the reader might get confused)

Response : This point has been added.

R2.8 page 6, lines 36-37 – can you please provide more details on how there 32 spectra were generated? Are these spectra needed for the SD and are all similar just the noise is different but keeping the same value? If yes maybe replace “generated” with “used”?

Response : TODO

R2.9 page 7 end- why zero feeling is needed? Is the freq offset calculated using 3 reference metabolites? Why not only one?

Response : zero filling gives a slightly more accurate estimate due to increased spectral resolution. 3 reference signals are better for clinical MRS and don't cause a problem for normal appearing brain.

R2.10 page 10, line 19 – what “molecular basis ” means?

Response : Mentions of "molecular basis" have been removed as I agree this is confusing. The original idea was to distinguish between the spline basis and the basis of known signals eg metabolites, lipids and MMs, as mathematically they are both "basis sets". However, readers with an MRS background would assume basis-set only refers to the set of metabolite, lipid and MM signals (not spline functions).

R2.11 page 11 – results. Please provide in the text the best values found for the baseline for each simulation test and please also mention the level of flexibility needed/required

Response : Values found by ABfit are now given in the figure captions (see R1.30). The exact level of flexibility needed is subjective and therefore not possible to define exactly. I think is better to say the values found are a reasonable compromise between bias (baseline too flat) and variance (baseline too flexible) based on the shape of the error curve and the variance of the estimates (illustrated by the error bars).

R2.12 page 12- experimental – same as question 11

Response : TODO

R2.13 discussion – I miss a conclusion about what is best, flexible or non-flexible baseline or something in between. Recently for LCModel some researchers have suggested the usage of flat baseline (i.e. dkntmn=5) and I’m not sure that this is a good idea. Flat baseline should be imposed only when the acquired MRS data are perfect like in your simulation test no 4. But in real life these MRS data are not always available. Since in the present manuscript simulations were performed with known metabolite concentrations, a conclusion can be drawn since the true values are known.

Response : TODO

R2.14 metabolite estimation error, page 6 lines 37-38 – is done for all metabolites and MM together, i.e sum of true values vs sum of estimated values? I guess these errors are not in % so what is the max allowed value?  In some figures these errors are extremely high.

Response : Errors are measured as the sum of squared differences between true and estimated values, eg sum of (NAA_true - NAA_estimate)^2 + (Cr_true - Cr_estimate)^2 ... and does not include MM or lipid signals. The text has been adjusted to clarify. Figures S1 - S6 have been added to illustrate the error in the metabolite signal component. The maximum acceptable error value is very specific to the application, so I'd prefer not to give bounds. For example, the simple presence or absence of NAA may be useful information for brain tumour studies - so very high errors are acceptable. Conversely the detection of metabolite differences between healthy and subjects with a psychiatric condition may be far more subtle and require much lower errors.

Author revisions

R0.1 p2 line 20 two adjacent sentences start with "One of the". First sentence now starts with "An important distinction...".

R0.2 a mistake was found in the code to generate Figure 7 where two identical Lip13b signals were in the basis set used for fitting, and the Lip20 was not present. This has been corrected to have one Lip13b and one Lip20 signal (in addition to the others). This resulted in a very minor change in the y axis range of part A, but the overall shape of the curve remained the same.
